# Changelog

LogicNG uses [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

## [2.5.0] - 2024-xx-xx

### Removed (Potentially Breaking Change!)

- All parser classes from `org.logicng.io.parsers` (including in particular the two main parsers `PropositionalParser` and `PseudoBooleanParser`) as well as the class `org.logicng.io.readers.FormulaReader` were moved to the new artifacts `org.logicng.logicng-parser-j8` (or `org.logicng.logicng-parser-j11` for Java 11). So there LogicNG now consists of two artifacts:
  - All the core functionality of LogicNG except for the parser is located in the "old" `org.logicng:logicng` artifact. This artifact does *not* depend on ANTLR anymore (which was the reason for splitting the library). For the time being this library will be based on Java 8, but nothing should prevent its usage in higher Java versions.
  - The parser functionality is located in `org.logicng:logicng-parser-j8` (for Java 8 and ANTLR 4.9.3) and `org.logicng:logicng-parser-j11` (for Java 11 and the most recent ANTLR version). The version of this library will stay in sync with the core library.
- The method `FormulaFactory.parse()` was removed. If you're using this method you should include one of the new parser artefacts and then just create your own `PropositionalParser` or `PseudoBooleanParser` and call `parse()` on them.

### Added

- Added unsafe methods `term` and `dnf` to the `FormulaFactory` to create a term (conjunction of literals) or a DNF (c.f. with method `FormulaFactory#clause` and `FormulaFactory#cnf`). Both methods do not perform reduction operations and therefore are faster. Only use these methods if you are sure the input is free of complementary and redundant operands.
- Class `UBTree` offers new method `generateSubsumedUBTree` to directly generate a subsumed UBTree for the given sets. 
- The `DnnfFactory` now offers a method to compile a DNNF with a `DnnfCompilationHandler`
- The `ModelCounter` now offers a method to pass a `DnnfCompilationHandler` in order to control long-running computations

### Changed

- UBTree data structure now supports empty sets.
- Added side effect note in `SATSolver` for the four assumption solving methods.
- Methods for reordering and swapping variables on BDD were refactored: `BDD.getReordering`, `BDDKernel.getReordering`, and `BDD.swapVariables` are now deprecated and should not be used anymore. Instead, there are new methods on the `BDDKernel`. Note that these actions affect all BDDs generated by the kernel.
  - `BDDKernel.swapVariables` for swapping two variables (or variable indices)
  - `BDDKernel.reorder` for automatically reordering the BDD
  - `BDDKernel.activateReorderDuringBuild` for activating reordering during build
  - `BDDKernel.addVariableBlock` for defining a variable block for reordering
  - `BDDKernel.addAllVariablesAsBlock` for defining one block for each variable (s.t. all variables are allowed to be reordered independently)
- Significant performance improvements in the DTree generation for DNNFs
- Added side effect note in `SATSolver` for the four assumption solving methods. 
- Minor performance improvements in some DNF/CNF generating algorithms by using faster `cnf`/`dnf`.

### Fixed

- Fixed edge case in method `add(Formula formula, Proposition proposition)` in `MiniSat`. If a formula is added to the SAT solver, it can happen that a variable is not added to the solver because it was removed during the CNF transformation. A `model()` call or model enumeration will not produce models containing this variable since it was not added to the solver. The fix ensures that all variables of the original formula are added to the solver and thus, a found model includes the variable. 
- The formula generation on BDDs was broken when the ordering was changed by `BDDKernel.reorder` or `BDDKernel.swapVariables`. This is now fixed.

## [2.4.1] - 2022-12-01

### Changed

- Allowing symbol `#` in variable names for the `PropositionalParser` and the `PseudoBooleanParser`.
- Set the Java Jigsaw automatic module name to `logicng` in the manifest.

## [2.4.0] - 2022-11-24

### Added

- Completely rewritten graphical outputs of formulas, BDDs, and graphs in the package `org.logicng.io.graphical`. It is now possible to configure the
  generated graphs by dynamically styling nodes, edges, and computing node labels. Also, there are now two possible output formats: GraphViz DOT and Mermaid.js.
- Convenience methods `isSatisfiable`, `isTautology`, `isContradiction`, `implies`, `isImpliedBy` and `isEquivalentTo` in the `Formula` class.
- New OLL algorithm for OpenWBO for more efficient weighted MaxSAT solving.
- Two overloaded factory methods `mk` in `MiniSat` to construct a solver by formula factory, solver style and optional configuration.
- Methods to directly apply Boolean functions on BDDs
- Added `toFormula` method on BDDs to generate a formula via Shannon expansion
- Convenience methods `variables(Collection<String> names)` and `variables(String... names)` for creating a list of variables in the `FormulaFactory` class.

### Changed

- Methods `generateFromCnf(Formula formula)` and `generateFromCnf(Collection<Formula> formulas)` in `ConstraintGraphGenerator` are now deprecated, since the
  constraint graph generation is not CNF specific. Both methods will be removed with LogicNG 3.0. Instead, use the general
  method `generateFromFormulas(Collection<Formula> formulas)`.

## [2.3.2] - 2022-08-02

### Changed

- The cached PB and CC encodings are no longer held in the constraint itselt but analogously to the other caches in the formula factory.

### Fixed

- A small bug which could occur when using the extended formula factory in combination with cached CC and PB encodings.

## [2.3.1] - 2022-07-27

### Changed

- Removed `negativeVariables` from the internal representation of `Assignment` it is now computed each time the method is called. This leeds to a minimal
  performance disadvantage but to a proportional better memory footprint. The public API is not changed.
- Updated ANTLR to 4.9.3 (there were no relevant updates to the Java target, therefore no changes are expected for LogicNG)

### Fixed

- A small bug when comparing two backbones with the same set of negative/positive/optional variables but different satisfiability.

## [2.3.0] - 2022-07-18

### Added

- Overloaded method `createAssignment` in `MiniSat` by flag whether the created assignment should be a fast evaluable assignment.
- Extended `ModelEnumerationFunction.Builder` by flag `fastEvaulable` which indicates whether the created assignments should be a fast evaluable assignment.
- Convenience methods `isNNF()`, `isDNF()` and `isCNF()` in class `Formula`
- Two new constructors for `Substitution`s and a new method `getMapping()` to get the internal mapping
- Method `getSubstitution` on `Anonymizer` to get the mapping from original variable to anonymized one
- A DNF from BDD function `BDDDNFFunction`, a subclass of the newly added class `BDDNormalFormFunction`
- A DNF from BDD formula transformation `BDDDNFTransformation`, a subclass of the newly added class `BDDNormalFormTransforamtion`
- A canonical CNF enumeration `CanonicalCNFEnumeration`, a subclass of the newly added class `CanonicalEnumeration`.

### Changed

- Improved methods `intersection` and `union` in `CollectionHelper` by using bounded wildcards.
- Improved performance of `hashCode` and `equals` in `Assignment` by avoiding redundant hash set creation.
- Method `BDD#dnf()` uses the newly introduced `BDDDNFFunction` to obtain a smaller DNF instead of a canonical DNF
- Class `BDDCNFFunction` uses the singleton pattern
- All functions/transformations/predicates with only a default constructor introduce a static `get()` method with the singleton pattern. The public
  constructors are now deprecated and will be removed with LogicNG 3.0
- Always use the default configuration of algorithms from the formula factory and do not construct them in the respective classes separately.

### Fixed

- Minor edge case issue in `NegationSimplifier` which yielded a larger result formula than input formula.
- The `TermPredicate` logic was inverted. In detail, the minterm predicate  `TermPredicate#getMintermPredicate()` tested for a maxterm and the
  `TermPredicate#getMaxtermPredicate()` tested for a minterm. To prevent silent errors for callers of these predicates, the factory method names were changed
  to `minterm()` and `maxterm()`, respectively. Thus, an intentional breaking change on compile time level has been introduced to force callers to adjust their
  logic.
- Minor edge case issue in `MiniSat` when performing assumption solving with proof tracing.
- Fixed two bugs in the backbone computation on the MiniCard solver.

## [2.2.1] - 2022-06-11

### Added

- Basic support for OSGi via `maven-bundle-plugin`

## [2.2.0] - 2021-11-09

### Added

- Improved `FormulaFactory` by avoiding creating unnecessary negations (cache pollution) during the check for complementary operands.
- Improved the NNF computation by avoiding creating unnecessary negations (cache pollution) during the recursive calls.
- Extracted the NNF computation in its own transformation class `NNFTransformation`.
- Moved all formula caches from the `Formula` class to the `FormulaFactory` to save memory by avoiding creating empty cache maps.
- New `TermPredicate` class to check whether a formula is a minterm (clause) or maxterm (DNF term).
- Extended helper classes `CollectionHelper` and `FormulaHelper` by additional convenient methods.

### Fixed

- Fixed a bug in the `addSoftFormula` method of the `MaxSATSolver` class. A soft formula is now weighted properly if the soft formula is not a clause.
- Fixed a bug in the `addWithRelaxation` method of the `SATSolver` class. The CNF of the formula is now computed properly regarding the configuration of the
  solver.

### Deprecated

- Deprecation of method `addWithoutUnknown` in class `SATSolver` - this method will be removed in future versions.
- Deprecation of method `addWithRelaxation` for propositions in class `SATSolver` - this method will be removed in future versions.

## [2.1.0] - 2021-07-18

### Added

- Reworked handlers
    - New handlers for backbones, MUS, SMUS, prime compilation, and advanced simplifier
    - three different types for timeout handlers:
        - `SINGLE_TIMEOUT`: The timeout is started when the handler's `started()` method is called
        - `RESTARTING_TIMEOUT`: The timeout is restarted everytime the handler's `started()` method is called
        - `FIXED_END`: The timeout is interpreted as a fixed point in time (in milliseconds) at which the computation should be aborted
- Improved version detection for compiled and packaged versions of LogicNG
- Introduced Mockito for unit tests

### Fixed

- Fixed a bug in the DIMACS formula writer when there was only a single clause with multiple literals

## [2.0.2] - 2020-09-19

### Fixed

- Fixed another bug for a special case in the DRUP proof generation

## [2.0.1] - 2020-09-18

### Fixed

- Fixed a bug for a special case in the DRUP proof generation

## [2.0.0] - 2020-07-30

### Added

- DNNF data structure and compilation
- DNNF-based model counting
- BDD Reordering
- Computation of shortest MUSes
- Computation of prime implicant and implicates
- New algorithms for simplifying Boolean formulas including the possibility to define an own rating function for the formula complexity
- A new method for generation constraint graphs of formulas
- A SAT encoding of the SET COVER problem
- New explicit data structure for cardinality constraints
- New formula functions for
    - Computing the depth of a formula
    - Computing a minimum prime implicant of a formula
- New formula predicates for
    - Pseudo Boolean Constraint containment
    - Fast evaluation to a constant
- New formula transformations for
    - Literal substitution
    - Expansion of pseudo-Boolean constraints
- New solver function for optimizing the current formula on the solver (wrt. the number of positive/negative literals)
- New formula randomizer and corner case generator, especially useful for testing
- Configuration object for formula factory which can be used to allow trivial contradictions and tautologies in formulas and to specify a default merge strategy
  for formulas from
  different factories
- New helper classes for collections
- Stream operators on formulas

### Changed

- Changed Java Version to JDK 8
- switched to ANTLR 4.8
- switched to JUnit 5
- PBC and CC methods in the formula factory return `Formula` objects now (not `PBConstraint` objects) and can simplify the constraints
- Moved BDD package to `knowledgecompilation`
- Reorganized `explanations` package
- Reorganized code location in the BDD package and simplified the `BDDFactory`
- Reorganized code location in the SAT Solver package, introduced solver functions which allow better separation of code for functions of the solver
- Propositions now hold a simple formula, no `ImmutableFormulaList` anymore
- fixed a spelling problem: propositions now have a correct `backpack`
- More classes are `protected` now and can be extended from outside
- Moved parser grammars from `resources` to `antlr`

### Removed

- CleaneLing solver
- `ImmutableFormulaList` class

## [1.6.2] - 2020-01-18

### Added

- New BDD handlers

### Changed

- Some improvements to handlers for computations

## [1.6.1] - 2019-09-16

### Added

- A new method for solving a formula with a given literal ordering.

### Changed

- Minor refactoring of the Formatter super class (no effects on callers).

### Fixed

- Fixed the behaviour of model enumeration with additional variables.

## [1.6.0] - 2019-09-04

### Added

- A new method for generating CNFs directly on the solver instead of using the formula factory. This often leads to a faster generation and reduced Heap
  consumption but with the
  loss of caching
- The current formula on a MiniSat-based solver can be extracted

### Changed

- The standard MiniSat-based solvers can now directly efficiently compute a backone. No extra solver is required anymore
- BDD factory can now be extended externally

## [1.5.2] - 2019-07-15

### Changed

- Clarified behaviour of the `Backbone` object

### Fixed

- Fixed caching behaviour when using a `sat()` call without assumptions after a call with assumptions

## [1.5.1] - 2019-05-08

### Added

- Introduced a new `FormulaHelper` class for small utility methods on formulas
- Added a new NNF predicate

### Fixed

- Fixed an unspecified behaviour in `SATPredicate`
- Fixed a small performance issue in the new backbone solver
- Fixed a bug in a special case of the CNF transformation of a pseudo-Boolean constraint

## [1.5.0] - 2019-03-17

### Added

- Algorithm & data structures for efficiently computing backbones of formulas
- Data structures for UBTrees in order to efficiently identify sub- and supersets
- CNF and DNF subsumption as formula transformations
- Backbone simplifier (compute and propagate the backbone of a formula)
- A new sorted formula formatter which respects a given variable ordering when printing formulas

### Changed

- Minor code refactorings and improvements

### Deprecated

- Deprecation of CleaneLing - this solver will be removed in future versions.

## [1.4.1] - 2018-12-07

### Changed

- Some refactorings for unit tests on Windows regarding encodings
- The Quine-McCluskey implementation does not yield CNF auxiliary variables anymore

### Fixed

- Fixed a minor bug in the generation of incremental cardinality constraints

## [1.4.0] - 2018-06-03

### Added

- BDD package (based on Buddy) for creating, manipulating, and writing BDDs
    - Creation of BDDs from LogicNG formulas
    - CNF, DNF transformation of BDDs
    - Restriction, existential & universal quantifier elimination
    - Model counting & enumeration
    - Different static variable ordering heuristics (FORCE, DFS, BFS, MinMax)
    - Writing BDDs in the GraphViz .dot format
- Quine-McCluskey Implementation for minimizing canonical DNFs
- New formula transformation for anonymizing formulas

### Changed

- Internal parser and IO improvements. Variables can now start with a digit.

## [1.3.1] - 2018-01-28

### Added

- New formula transformation which imports formulas in another formula factory

### Changed

- Huge performance boost in the model enumeration of MiniSat

### Fixed

- Small bugfix for a trivial case in DRUP

## [1.3.0] - 2017-10-25

### Added

- MiniSat and Glucose have a new option for proof tracing. A DRUP implementation stores all the necessary information for generating a proof for unsatisfiable
  formulas after
  solving them. The new method can be found in the SAT solver class: `unsatCore()`
- A new simplifier which applies the distributive law was added: `DistributiveSimplifier`

### Changed

- Unsat Cores are now parametrized with the proposition type

### Fixed

- Some minor bug-fixes in handling corner cases of cardinality and pseudo-Boolean constraints

## [1.2.0] - 2017-07-14

### Added

- Introduced an extended formula factory which is able to return to a previously saved state and delete old formulas (and get them garbage collected)
- A simple data structure for generic graphs including algorithms for connected components and maximal cliques
- Improved IO (Writers for formulas, Dimacs CNFs, and graphs)

### Changed

- SAT solvers can now track the currently known variables
- Updated to ANTLR 4.7

### Fixed

- Various smaller bugfixes

## [1.1.0] - 2016-08-29

### Added

- Implemented cardinality constraint encodings and pseudo-Boolean constraints encodings of PBLib
- Incremental cardinality constraints, including the possibility to add cardinaliy constraints to the solver without introducing new formula factory variables
- Different MUS algorithms

## [1.0.0] - 2016-01-25

### Added

- Initial Release of LogicNG
